I'm going to talk briefly about the Dzogchen. Generally, we all, you all practice the Dzogchen
and so on. You already know why the Dzogchen teaching intellectually. I'm not saying that
we all got realization. We all have some degree of understanding and the knowledge of the
intellectually level of Dzogchen teaching. So again, I talk a little bit today on that
level. And then the most important ones we understand of the Dzogchen teaching, what
we can do is all what I teach and need to practice. Practicing and to bring the result
on that. That is really the most important. Knowing is so important, of course, but then
the practice is so important. Now, it's here. Here in the highlight of the teachings of
this he said, and explaining of the Dzogchen's own unmistakably explaining of the Dzogchen
part. That's not really teaching. He said, what is that here? See, if I read these translated
ones, that the experience of the repertoire, the actualization of the insight and the primordial
existence is the Buddha-summoned bhadra, free from abundantly and attainment. And it is
the great completion of the essential nature of all parts of the samsara and nirvana. Therefore,
it is known as the path-grade completions. So those are mentioned back here. So now it's
said at expense of the Rupa, at the beginning, at the expense of the Rupa, the actualization
in sight, primordial existence. So that is how now we're going to actualize this. How
do we just go? Generally, again, as I mentioned yesterday, or the day before yesterday, we've
been talking about the dzogchen, the nine yanas. We went one after another, another different
level of the yanas. So if we talk that same way, if I talk that same way, first is what
is the nature of the dzogchen? What is the nature of the dzogchen? The nature of the
dzogchen is primordial in the western, origin in the inherited, on its own, within our own
self. All primordial westerns of the clay-like luminosity, which is residing within every
single living being in their heart center or in their nature. That is the nature of the
dzogchen, the primordial western. And what is the dzogchen teaching? That dzogchen teaching
is the instruction, how to discover that in the primordial clay-like luminosity in nature,
without effort, without effort and activity, discover that nature. That is dzogchen teaching.
So now I really explain dzogchen, the nature of dzogchen and the teachings of dzogchen.
The teaching is that to discover our innate nature, nature of the primordial wisdom, clay-like
luminosity, to discover that. That we all have. That has different names and different yanas.
And as we were in the other day, everyone tried to find that truth, and it has all the different
interpretations at that, and also different names within the buddhist. But reality,
nature is one, there's not many natures. Same nature. Same nature. The nature, what this
nature is, is clay, unappended luminosity, nature. How to discover that? And again,
all the different schools, the yanas, explain in so many different ways.
And all those teachings and instructions are so powerful, so spacious. But however, according
point with dzogchen, when you look at it, it's all mentally created. Mind. So that means all is
effort. All is activity. It is activity of the subject and object in the actions. Activities
is all publications. The publication, according to Dzogki teaching, publication activity will not
discover the un-publicated nature of the truth, will not discover. Nature is un-publicated,
ordinary, primordial, versatile, uncompounded, enlightened, clay-like luminosity. To discover
that nature, exactly as it is, you have to do similar, similar way, as is natural. For that
reason, Dzogki technique, teaching tells beyond effort any activities naturally discover. And so
that is really about nature and meaning of the Dzogki teachings. Then in Dzogki teaching has
different names. Dzogki has a different name. Dzogki is a Tibetan word. In Sanskrit, according
to many great masters, what is it called? Maha-sindhi. That means Maha is a great, great, and
the Sandhi means completion. And Dzogki has another different name and called Ati-yoga.
And Ati means ultimate. Yoga means the same as natural. So ultimate yoga. That means all yoga we
translate. I mean yoga meaning, of course it's very popular in English too. Yoga means yoga. What
means yoga? It's natural. Yoga means natural. So ultimate nature. That means, that indicates
there's nothing higher, better, deeper, more accurate, more correct natural than discover our
innate nature of the mind. That means Ati-yoga. Ati, supreme ultimate yoga. That is yoga. Yoga.
Now this great teaching, when Buddha gave that teacher, of course you've heard so many times
and I also said many times, I heard that too. But again, everyone says that. Buddha gave this
teaching. The greatest teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, gave this teaching in the form of the Buddha
summoned the Buddha. Buddha summoned, therefore in the teaching said, there is nothing higher
and a better teacher than the summoned the Buddha. Buddha's teacher is a summoned the Buddha. Where
he gave the teaching, this Buddha gave the teaching, in the pure land of Akanisha,
pure land that beyond the dualities, grasping, beyond, not just the pure, beyond the dualities,
that pure land, pure land. To whom that self-discipline, the wisdom emanation,
such as the five dhyana Buddha, Vaiya sattva, Vaiya dharas, Buddha gave that teaching.
There are no other than the Buddha summoned the Buddha. Same realization, same status, same
display, self-discipline, primordial wisdom. That was the teaching measure, self-discipline.
How he gave that teaching without the world, without the levels. Unborn primordial wisdom
status expanded the whole entirely teaching through the rational of the primordial,
those in self-imminated wisdom, complete as an unborn voice. That Buddha gave that teaching.
And who gathered all that teaching? Who recorded that teaching? Again, in the Dandara teaching
measure,
and I am, in the teaching section, the Dandara teaching, I am the teacher, I am the
who collected the teachings, or who gathered the teachings, who gathered the teachings.
The one who gathered all the vatas, either gathering, gathering or who connected. Who gathered
these
teachings? Vaiya dharas and Vaiya sattva gathered, all collectible. So all teachings are completely
pervasive and evaporating, pervasive nature in a Darmadatta state of pure land. And then when time
comes, according to the teaching, everyone may be 28 years after the Buddha's Mahafari nirvana,
then when the time is ready to come to this wall, and the great master, Garabdhodi, who is the
emanation of the Buddha Vaiya sattva, over a high light in light beams, who emanated specifically
to bring, and to bring the Dokti teachings, came in the Odhianas, that is about 28 years after the
Buddha's Mahafari nirvana. And then he gathered the entire Dokti teachings, asked who gave them,
various sattva. In the teachings, there is a difference in his story, that one time,
to me, from these lungs, many larger stories, I'm sure many of you already know, and I'm not going
to
talk about those things, but one time he was young, and about seven years old, he disappeared for
quite
a while, and then, and they all worried, concerned, and when he come, then he reappeared. When he
reappeared, he said that whatever the Buddha Vaiya sattva knows, I know everything, I know,
Vaidya Vaiya sattva. So Vaiya sattva gives every teaching to him, empowerment, transmission,
and instructions, entirely Dokti teachings, handed to the Garabdhodis. And the Garabdhodi
becomes the sole lineage holder of the Dokti teachings, the entire teachings in that time,
human works. And then Dokti teachings, according to the teachings, three times,
under third generation, Dokti teachings become the single lineage. Garabdhodi is transmitted,
menjushiri matara, menjushiri matara. Matara is immediate to the, actually, those are three
lineages, and the teachings say that, and they had, they had many students, but Dokti teachings
only transmitted to them, to the three, three single lineages, one after another. And then,
Garabdhodi all gathered 6400 total Dokti teachings, and the teachings say that,
he collected that Dokti teachings. And then, menjushiri matara, his foremost student,
divided that Dokti teachings into three sections, mind section, space section, and
pit and stroke sections. And that is Dokti teachings, he collected that way. And then, here is that
,
this mind section, mind section of the Dokti teachings, space section of the Dokti teachings,
pit and stroke sections of the Dokti teachings, that pit and stroke sections of the Dokti teachings
,
Garabdhodi, sorry, here is divided into four different, those are, I mean,
renowned, outward, inner, sacred, demost, and sacred. And this demost, sacred, also he divided into
four groups, outer,
no, no, I'm sorry, that he divided that third one, the pit and stroke section, divided into three,
four, and outer, inner, and sacred, demost, and sacred ones. And so now, this, our practice,
what we practice, this Dokti teachings, is the demost, the sacred ones. That means the demostly
accurate with the ultimate teachings of the Buddha, that as ordinal, ultimate teaching,
that is sacred. That teaching has two, two stages to practice. Those are the, you all know,
no, true teaching and a pogol teaching, true, divided, true teaching. Both are
teaching on the nature of the mind, one's own nature of the mind teachings. So that is what
really how that, and that teaching came to be, then in a century, by Kinta from this time,
in Gaurabhai Masambhava, great pastor, Bhavana Madara, bought these at the most essence
teachings of the, of the Dokti teachings. At the same time, great author, Verojana,
also went into India and received the teachings from, directly from Kirishanath, as well as from
Gaurabdhoji. What's the body of the Gaurabdhoji? In Kirishanath, he received the teachings,
and bought back those out of the same mind section of teaching. With that section of
second teaching, he bought back and spread it out in teaching. And there's also Dantara
board, toggen with that, those are called, even different mind section of the same teachings,
as well as the Longdhi, Longdhi teaching. There's three groups of the Longdhi teaching,
which is known as the, the white groups of Longdhi teaching, black groups of the Longdhi teaching,
and the striped groups of the Longdhi teaching. Those are the teaching branches of three different
sections of the Dokti teachings that he bought. But the pre-instruction section of teaching is only
taught by the great Mahatma Ramana Madhara and Gaurabha Ramasambhava, to select the groups.
That teaching becomes, I mean, that, this all teachings are now existing, and why do you practice
it? But regularly, this beat starts with second teaching, than Gaurabha Ramasambhava, and the
Ramana Madhara teaching is that, kind of, more than, I'm generally your whole Dokti teaching,
is really completely kind of glorified, more clarified by the great Mahatma Ramasambhava.
Ramasambhava, who came in the 13th century, around the 13th century time, and bought,
and he was the, I mean, known as one of the great Dokhi masters. All the time, even many,
history, many great masters, mentioned Gaurabha Dodi of Tibet. Gaurabha Dodi of India is in India,
but Nampi Ma is Gaurabha Dodi of Tibet, that he really bought, he put some, all Dokhi teachings,
kind of, completely clarified, but regularly, the two lineage of the Nintek lineage, even though it
's
the same, the two lineage that comes from Gaurabha Masambhava and from Mahatma Madhara,
he put together those so-called seven whole groups of the Nintek teachings, and all that,
he meant the commentary, all that, so that is how they're really about that. So, what all this now
teaching, this entire Dokhi teaching, by Kunkimpa and to Gaurabha Masambhava teachings,
teachings, and Mahatma Madhara teachings, is the Dokhi teaching. So now, part of that is kind of
general explanation of the Dokhi, Dokhi's history, or how it started in Tibet. But now, how we to
practice this Dokhi teaching? How we practice this? Here, sit, sit here. To essence, we're required
to
actualize the insight and the primordial wisdom. Generally, we have the primordial wisdom, right
here, right here, with you, and with me, everyone, that's the Kaurabha teaching of the Buddha,
and Gaurabha Masambhava, everyone. But how we actualize that? How magnetic? See clearly that we can
,
why we don't see clearly that we make it, so I make it many times, and there is no
obscurations. The habit dependence, habit dependence, obscurations, there is very, very
heavy and thick, they're completely blocked, blocked, blocked and don't see that, that clearly.
So how we discover that? That is then following the path of the Dokhis, path of the Dokhi. Now,
to do that in the Dokhi teaching, in the highest teaching I've mentioned so many times, is called
"instantly teaching," that instantly gets realization, realization. But however, even though
teaching is an instantly technique, yet our hard-headed duality cannot break through easily,
therefore, we have to follow the graduating, gradually, gradually path we have to follow.
For that reason, we started practicing, such as Mundo practices, or taking the raffus,
take the raffus to the Vada Dharma Sangha, and then raffus is foundation, then develop the body
and then, along with that, pour in our second thoughts. Those are so important, because those
well, through softening our duality, regiment, clinging, attachment to the samsara, or to our
self-important attitude, it really will loosen up. Often we heard, "Bless me to mature my mind."
What means "mature" in mind? What our mind is not mature? At that end, it directly is not mature,
it's hard-headed, even though it may be delicious apple, but it's not mature. Or maybe it's
delicious
banana, but it's not mature. Because why? Grasping, clinging, negative emotions. All that,
we have to soften up that. Not as soon as we can soften up, as soon as we can do it. Even
Loki teaching is the most powerful, so directly teaching, but yet, our duality conceptions,
so strong. And our, those obstacles I listed the other day, five obstacles, or five rubbles,
are so strong. They're really always attacking us. Even in the teaching, I said, even you highly
realize that quite good progress in the past, still they can attack you. This, that, what I
propose, the rubbles, it's not just a short-time rubbles. This is going to rub our self for a long
time. Therefore, we practice, you know, always should be watchful, careful to our self that
we are not trapped within that. Again, back to that. Even the bigger, good, highly accomplished,
there's so many stories, highly accomplished, trapped and held on. Really, there's so many stories,
stories. So, therefore, we have to be hard, strong, and a detergent, diligent, and a
disarmature. And courage is one. Courage is one. Courage is one, and practice, within the teaching,
empowerment. Practice that with joyful effort, with devotion, joy, and appreciation. And very
humble
and simple, drawn to the earth, any practice meditate. Then, gradually, we're going to revere
our nature, our nature of this Buddha nature. Gradually, as I said the other day in the teaching,
then gradually we become more bright, more bright, more clay, more clay. Then we become
the really good practitioners. Good practitioners, but still watchful with all the obstacles, with
mindfulness, aliveness, and consciousness. Then, also, when that happens, what happens is the sign
of the realization in the teaching making, your wisdom is well, more growing. More love and
compassion is more growing. More your, more passion, the tolerance is more coming, more stronger,
and stronger. Those are the signs of the achievement, the realization. And you become
all mellow, not so tense, more losing of ourselves. That, and those over, then those are the signs
of
the achievement is like this, actually, inside. Then really begin to see that, truly, that. And
then,
then continually discovering that when it comes on, the wisdom, or the discrimination, awareness,
the wisdom of the intelligent wisdom, when they are formed, formed gradually to become stronger,
stronger, and then become the western. Here's the primordial wisdom, the discovered primordial
wisdom. The primordial wisdom is an inherently natural of our own sight. We have, I think,
when we mentioned the other day, we went through it, and yet, I'm sure you know many in the
teaching,
but primordial wisdom is five times all out within our Buddha nature, within the Dokki nature,
within the Dachangaba status. So that nature, then we discover all that gradually, one after
another,
another, we reach a higher enlightenment, or in the Dokki teachings, when you see the
nature according to Dokki level. Also, when you continue meditating and receiving practices with
the devotional stone, with devotion and joy and appreciation, then we get the realization of the,
seeing the true nature, exactly as it is. First and foremost, our understanding of true nature,
of the nature of the mind is, even though nature is always in the arts, even though,
whether introducing, pointing out the teaching, we go through, through, but still, we kind of,
there's a real blocking, really, to see the true nature, exactly as it is, because most of the time
,
we believe to see true nature, something that, kind of, like some other form, or something
that which I can rely, or I can rely, I can see, I can feel that. That's what we really think,
always, always think. So then it can be like, but then, nature is, ever can feel something,
that means, you're trying to realize that you're putting, we're trying to put the realization,
traveling in the consultations. Relation is not a conception, it's called the teaching.
It's not that, not, like, thought, concept, try to trap that. Relation is pretty from the
conceptions.
So, nature is that, that, so that really, many times, we don't see, but however,
even though that we see, kind of, at the beginning time, intellectually, maybe we understand,
those are known as the intellectual views, in that way, the teaching said, we give to the thought,
view of the, the analytic, and we do, analytically, your understanding. Then that, when we are kind
of with that, that is used that as stepping stones, continually embedded in the practice,
then we go beyond of that analytic views, then you discover, discover, exactly, nature as it is.
And that is the salt root of the one's own awareness, rarikata, in its way, rarikata,
salt root of one's own awareness mind. That is the perfect root, the call and the teaching.
And that seeing that, exactly as it is known as the stage of the, seeing true nature,
exactly as it is, then we continually expand, is getting stronger and stronger than expanding the
realization stages, also, the experience is increasing, and then reaching the view of the
awareness. That means, if we got to understand the part at the beginning of now, everything really
see most, that medalla of the three guys, as we heard so many times, but now you begin to see
our own self, the naked status. And then beyond, the thought state is known as, that the ultimate
state of true, true natures. Natures, natures, those are the pole stages of zoki, you know,
kind of practice, and when you practice in tattoo practices, or toggle practice, those are the
teachings here. So that time, then definitely, we discovered all the five Muslims. And these five
Muslims, and the five guys are in the reality, and they said here, is the Buddha summoned, but
it's free from the abandoned attachment. Because this Buddha, what we discovered, is not something
that newly arrived, newly happened. It is the origin in the nature that we discovered. They
discovered, therefore, it is beyond, beyond of the, beyond, abundantly, or beyond, there is
something
that we're going to lost, and regain. No, it's always been there, that we're not, not gaining
anything. For that reason, in the teaching of the heart suttara, there is, uh, uh,
prabhayami, matupayami, there's nothing to gain, nothing to lose. In the heart suttara, you have
maybe better translations. Nothing gain, nothing to lose. This is the origin in any nature, as it
is.
It's the origin here. But however, in the duality conception, we lost it. Because
meters of our own dualities, we lost it. So now we have to regain back. Let's discover that,
that. And that, that is, that is the origin of the Buddha summoner-buddha. The summoner-buddha
is not the same name of the tathagata-garbha. summoner-buddha, tathagata-garbha, oh, it is like,
I mean, origin nature. How is this Buddha summoner-buddha? The great master,
Chandra, not Chandra, said, you know, his, his great logic, logic teaching, logic teaching,
reasonable teaching. And he said, this dharma, summoner-buddha, summoner-buddha is a pre-pro,
all the nets of the consulsions, pre-pro nets of the consulsions, net, N-E-T-R, the net of
the consulsions. And it has performed me, performed the qualities of the, of the Gaias and the
Muslims, and emanating the beneficial light into every direction without any partialities. And that
is, and I, I pay homage to that summoner-buddha, to that summoner-buddha. This great master,
logician, logician, and who is the one of the leading master of the also mind on the school.
He said that in teaching. So that is the origin of summoner-buddha, the our own,
our own is teaching. The other day there is many, and a quarter, many, uh, in a zoki teaching,
in a zoki teaching, there is like, uh, prud, divisions of summoner-buddha. There is the
first summoner-buddha is called post-buddha summoner-buddha. This is the origin of buddha,
post-buddha ever. That is the, but, but then the self-heverness summoner-buddha, that's what
is pointed out here. One's own nature, within the nature of the mind, self-heverness summoner-budd
ha.
That summoner-buddha is, is. And when you got that realization, when you discovered, discovered
that,
then the samsara is summoner-buddha, and the niran is summoner-buddha, or samsara is zopa-chimbo,
niran is zopa-chimbo, and path is zopa-chimbo, zopa-chimbo. There is, everything is a zoki state,
and then nothing is not outside, or outside the zoki state. All is in zoki state, zoki state.
That part, for that reason, in a great, great mother, ukimba, said, you know, in his teachings,
said. But
apparently, the summoner-buddha, emptiness is summoner-buddha, and happiness is summoner-buddha,
suffering is summoner-buddha, summoner-buddha, summoner-buddha, and within the state of the
kundasambhu, there is no death and birth, and all is, part of the display of the primordial wisdom.
Nothing. The death and the birth is a notion of the conceptions and the dualities. Reality
now is all displays. And for that reason, the every, and he said, now kunda tomokonda kudu jen,
did all these summoner-buddha states, states, states. So, therefore, therefore, that is called
path-zoki, path-zoki, because when we don't have the realization of it, as it is, then we follow
in the path, exactly, with the instructionals, start with the rafu, and the bodhijeta, and the
po-renoza, the toad, all those who believe the toad, and the practice, the meditation, exactly as
in
the teaching and structure, and then it's called the path-zoki, that is the seren, and then we
go to the next one, and the next one is yutupindel lom-saas, som-saan-tayyawala-gom-yaas.
And all the